---
title    : "Gutenberg: The good, the bad, and the ugly"
author   : justin-tadlock
date     : 2018-09-01
category : wordpress
tag      : [ wordpress, wordpress-discussion ]
---

Love it or hate it, Gutenberg is sure to bring out some passionate responses from both users and developers.

If you haven't been following along, Gutenberg is a project that will likely replace the WordPress editor in the future.  Currently, it's in a beta testing phase, which should've been an alpha testing phase (that seemed to get skipped over).

There are many unanswered questions about the future of Gutenberg and how that plays into the future of WordPress.  What follows is my review of version 0.7.1.

## The good: Gutenberg will revolutionize post editing

At its core, Gutenberg seems to be a block-based page editor.  Basically, that's a fancy way of saying "page builder."

I have projects where the pages are HTML code soup, which are a pain to manage with the text editor.  With a block-based system, I could arrange the page output without having to write code.  That would allow to shift my focus back to the page content.  And, it means that millions of users will have the same luxury.

## The bad: Gutenberg is horrible for long-form content

I'd hate to write this post I'm typing right now in Gutenberg.  It's not blogger friendly if you want to simply _just write_.  The block system gets in the way.  To be fair, I dislike the current editor in WordPress just as much.

I'm composing this post in the [Atom]() text editor on my computer and will copy and paste it into the WordPress editor when it's time to publish.  I'll then proceed to make tweaks to the final draft in WordPress.  I'm also writing in Markdown, which WordPress doesn't natively support.  So, I'm using a plugin to format that on output, which brings me to my next point.

If we're getting a new editor, it should have a Markdown mode.  The team might as well go all out.

## https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/issues/3304#issuecomment-341922758

> Can we conclude that for the long-term of WordPress, Metaboxes are locking its evolution (regardless of Gutenberg)?
>
> Yes, they are. And Internet history proved so many times that a technology that doesn’t evolve dies. (please do not react with 👎 If you do not like this answer, it's a fact and not an opinion)

I'd say it's the lack of a standard API for building fields that could be used in meta boxes and other admin areas that's holding back the evolution of WordPress.  When you do not provide developers the tools necessary to build the things they need to build, they create their own tools using wildly different standards.  The lack of a standardized API is why we've seen the emergence of popular frameworks like Advanced Custom Fields, CMB2, and even my own ButterBean (a little shameless self-promotion there).

This isn't just an issue with form fields.  Almost the entirety of the WP admin is lacking standards that plugin developers can reuse.  This is a lack of planning and management.

For example, in a recent plugin update, I wanted to have an admin page that showcased all of the add-on plugins available.  I also wanted this to look like the "plugin cards" you see on the standard Plugins screen in the admin.  However, there's no standard API for doing this.  So, I had to recreate the markup in my own plugin and am left hoping that WP doesn't change their code at some point.



























----------------
